>> Jason Lengstorf: So the major benefit
of using themes in Gatsby versus just
doing a site individually is
that when you create a theme,
you're able to package up
that logic in a sharable way.
So in the theme that we're gonna create
today, we're gonna add support for
writing up docs.
And in those docs,
we might wanna use that in multiple sites.
Maybe if you work in an agency, this is
gonna be a common pattern where you've
got clients that need similar but
slightly different things.
You can package up all the common
functionality into a theme, and
then share that in a reusable way.
And a major benefit here over using
a standard boilerplate is that
when you're using a theme,
that theme is an NPM package.
When you use a boilerplate,
you're cloning a repo.
As soon as you clone a repo,
that is now your responsibility.
You've fully opted-in to maintaining
all of the code in that boilerplate.
If things happen upstream, you would have
to then manually import those changes.
You would have to look at the migration
docs, figure out what changed.
And then, port those changes over
into each usage of that boilerplate.
That's a huge pain.
And if you've got a lot of sites, if
you're working on, say, a client site, and
they've got a suite of
15 different properties,
the time investment to do
an upgrade like that is not small.
So with a theme, it becomes a package,
just an NPM installed package.
So to get those upstream updates,
all you have to do is NPM install the
theme at latest and you get those updates.
So now, you can set up something like
dependabot to automatically keep
your sites up to date with whatever
the upstream latest best practice is.
Another benefit of using themes versus
just building it all out directly is
that because themes are composable
you can break down sites into small,
logically grouped sets of functionality
that handle one thing really well in
a really maintainable way, which then
makes that sharing much more easy.
If you built a site, and
that site has a blog and e-commerce and
a marketing page and
an email capture form,
those are four distinct jobs that if
they were broken into themes, then any
site that needs a contact form, you can
just drop in the contact form theme.
Any site that needs a blog,
you drop in the blog theme.
And your sites become more like
Lego block assembly rather than
looking at previous work and
copy pasting out the pieces that you need.
So this is gonna give you all the same
benefits of building it as a site,
but with an added layer of benefits of
upstream updates and the ability to
compose smaller units of code together
much more quickly and maintainably.
>> Speaker 2: So
Gatsby themes is not just about the UI,
it's actually the functionality as well?
>> Jason Lengstorf: Gatsby
themes is UI and functionality.
So a Gatsby theme is effectively
a fully functioning Gatsby site.
The only difference is that it
accepts configuration options and
needs to be installed as a package,
as opposed to running standalone.
But a lot of Gatsby sites these days,
if you look at the default blog theme
starter, what it is is just an empty
folder with a content folder for
blogs and
a Gatsby config that installs the theme.
And the rest of everything else in
it is handled in the theme itself.
>> Jason Lengstorf: It’s anything that
you can do with a Gatsby site, but
packaged up in such a way that it’s
configurable, reusable, and shareable.
So ranging from theme to
the underlying data manipulation and
schema customization and all the things
that you would do on a standard site.
>> Speaker 3: Is there a difference
between a plugin and a theme, or
things that one can do
that the other can't?
>> Jason Lengstorf: For the most part, no.
The one major difference is that themes,
when they use the Gatsby theme tag,
opt-in to component shadowing behavior,
and they have a Gatsby config.
So really, a Gatsby theme is
a plug-in with a Gatsby config in it.
And anything else is a plug-in
without a Gatsby config in it.
That's the major difference.
And then, the naming is required because
that's how Gatsby identifies that
a theme should be handled differently.
>> Speaker 2: So is the concept of
a boilerplate gonna go away pretty much
then?
>> Jason Lengstorf: Inside
the Gatsby world,
I would expect that it
will be de emphasized.
I mean, I don't think anything ever really
goes away, because it's an open ecosystem.
People have preferences and
people are gonna do things
the way they're gonna do them.
In my experience, I have completely
stopped using boilerplates because
themes function as boilerplates.
But they add an additional layer
of benefits that I, to me,
it just doesn't make sense
to do a boilerplate anymore.